---
layout: page
title: Instructor Training
subtitle: Designing Lessons
minutes: 10
---
> ## Learning Objectives {.objectives}
>
> * FIXME

There's a fairly intuitive way to design a course:

1.  Select a textbook.
2.  Before the first lecture, digest the first couple chapters into some lecture notes.
3.  Present the lecture notes over a week of lectures.
4.  Assign homework exercises from that portion of the text that was covered that week.

And repeat 2-4 until the end of the allotted time for the course, with
some midterms sprinkled in the middle and a final at the end. On its
surface, not totally unreasonable; a logically written textbook can
scaffold a semester of conversation pretty easily. But:

*   Are you sure that textbook & lecture series started in the right
    place for your learners? Faculty (should) know better than to
    trust a course's prerequisites to reflect their learners'
    knowledge - and a workshop instructor has an even foggier picture
    of where students are coming from.

*   Did the homework help deepen students' understanding - or just
    cement skills by rote?

*   How well can you predict what students will know by the end of the
    course? If the students can't follow the text at the premeditated
    speed and the instructor's only options are to slow down or
    abandon her students, learning goals may never be reached.

*   What mechanisms exist to give students additional pathways to
    understanding, beyond what's presented in the book?

These situations and pitfalls are common products of this
'march-through' approach to lesson design. We would like our
instruction to be better *targeted*, more *constructive*, more
*reliable* and more *adaptable* - but how?

A couple of tools will let us reach for our ambition. In this unit,
we'll learn about *reverse instructional design*, which will help with
targeting and reliability.
In the next section, we'll discuss *summative vs. formative
assessment*, which will help our lessons be more constructive and
adaptable.

### Reverse Instructional Design

Two of the characteristics we want for our lessons are better
reliability and better targeting, compared to what we get by stepping
linearly through a fixed text from a starting point that may not fit
our learners, through content that may be tangential to our key goals,
and towards a conclusion at an often arbitrary point in the curriculum
imposed by running out of time.

If we take reliable learning outcomes as our starting point, a simple
line of logic assembles itself.

In order to even attempt to assert that our teaching has a reliable
outcome, we must first decide what skill, knowledge or understanding
we want our students to acquire, and we must create some way of
assessing the students in order to demonstrate that they did indeed
assimilate that lesson.

At which point we've set up a measurable task for our students and can
ask the question, 'what will a student have to master from our lessons
before being able to succeed at this task?' - and we can keep asking
that question of all the dependencies we identify in this manner,
until we arrive at a set of skills & knowledge we believe we can
safely assume our students come to us with a priori.

Play that chain backwards in class, and you've got a lesson plan that
starts with assumptions about your learners at the per-skill (rather
than per-textbook chapter) level, thus being well targeted to your
students, and steps efficiently through concepts towards the ultimate
learning goal, thus being as reliable as possible.

This process is in essence *Reverse Instructional Design*, and it
represents an alternative in lesson design to proceeding linearly
between fixed points in a text.

## Procedure and Example

A typical implementation of reverse instructional design may go
something like this:

 - **Sketch a concept map.** As discussed in previous lessons, concept maps are always helpful
    for laying out a large topic so that connections can be tracked
    and scope can be controlled. Here's my quickie concept map
    surrounding some ideas in the bash shell:

![](img/rid0.jpg)

 - **Identify Goals.** Reverse instructional design is all about starting from where you
    want to get to. Choose the node or nodes on your concept map that
    you want students to have a clear understanding of after your
    lesson. Come up with some exercises or activities that will allow
    students to prove that they have mastered the target concept.

![](img/rid1.jpg)

 - **Characterize learners.** When we think about concepts at the level of nodes on a concept map,
    we've got the flexibility to better match where our students are
    coming from. It can often be helpful to imagine a character that
    you think represents your student's experience and knowledge; in
    this way, you can not only match your learners well, but sometimes
    gain some insight into how they will react to lessons, activities
    and ideas. For example:

    > Jennifer is a successful mid-career ecologist who has done most
    > of her analysis using spreadsheet software. She's come to this
    > class to learn how to augment her practice with a scripting
    > language.

    From this character, I can make an informed guess of what concepts
    are already understood; if I expect to have a room full of people
    with similar experiences to Jennifer, I might choose a few
    concepts from my map as starting knowledge:

![](img/rid2.jpg)

 - **Follow a path from back to front.** At this point, the lesson plan pretty much writes itself. Choose a
    path to get learners from where they are, to where they need to be.
    (Note that it's not necessary to touch on every node in the map
    right away!)

![](img/rid3.jpg)

Have a go at reverse instructional design in [this activity](http://mozillascience.github.io/instructorTraining/designAndAdaptation/RID_01.html).

Reverse instructional design has great strengths in efficiently
guiding students from where they are to where we want them to be - but
there are some pitfalls in too fervently fixing our gaze on outcomes.

**If you run out of time, you run out of time.** A big part of reverse
instructional design is mapping efficient routes to learning, without
the distractions and detours inherent in plodding through every page
of a topic textbook. But no matter how you plan your lessons,
sometimes you just run out of time; discourse that takes a life of its
own not only happens - it's the hallmark of an engaging learning
experience. And if taking the time you need to facillitate that
engagement and reinforce every concept well means you don't actually
get to the stated destination, so be it. Remember: you are up there to
*teach* - not to teach a particular topic. Smart lesson planning can
help your students keep pace; racing to a premeditated goal will just
leave them behind.

**Beware of "teaching to the test".** Reverse instructional design
emphasizes examining what students will need to learn in order to be
able to successfully complete the final assessment determining if they
reached the learning goals. This can sound dreadfully close to
'teaching to the test' - giving students so narrow a focus that they
are able to navigate the final exam, and little else. The key
difference is that instead of training students on rote problems to be
duplicated on the final assessment, reverse instructional design done
well builds up the student's concept map with enough strength that
they can navigate new challenges using what they learned in the
course; see to it that your final assessment includes such novelty,
and we protect ourselves from teaching mere exam strategy.

By sticking rigidly to a script, whether it's a textbook, a set of
notes or a lesson plan, we are essentially planning ourselves into a
corner; that process relies on us being able to make reliable
assumptions of our learners' knowledge, relies on our learners all
having very similar needs so they can be served with the same lesson,
and relies on us skillfully constructing what an adequate delivery
technique will be. Instead, we want to conduct a more adaptive lesson;
one that focuses on identifying & addressing our learners'
misconceptions and gaps in knowledge in situ, and gives them multiple
distinct opportunities to construct knowledge and understanding
accurately and for themselves.

> ## FIXME {.challenge}
>
> FIXME
