---
layout: page
title: Instructor Training
subtitle: Assessment and Adaptation
minutes: 10
---
> ## Learning Objectives {.objectives}
>
> * FIXME

### Assessment

Any adaptive process requires observations to adapt to - so, we need
effective tools to observe & assess student understanding. Student
assessment is commonly grouped into two gross categories: *summative*,
and *formative*.

**Summative Assessment** is intended to measure learning outcomes; the
canonical example is the final exam. A well-designed summative
assessment should reveal how well students have met the design goals
of a course or lesson, as laid out in the first step of reverse
instructional design; its principle use is for deciding if the course
as a whole was successful.

**Formative Assessment** is intended to measure student understanding
or ability in situ during a course, in order to adapt the course on
the fly to optimise the efficacy of that course.

Superficially, these sound pretty similar, up to when exactly they are
administered; they both assess student understanding &
performance. The key difference between the two is *resolution*; in
essence, summative assessment is only required to provide a simple up
or down indicator of whether a course did its job or not; but
formative assessment has to not only flag gaps in student performance,
but resolve *why and how* students are missing the mark, in order to
optimally inform instructional course correction.

Institutional Western education has converged largely on summative
assessment - principally because it's cheaper and easier. Summative
assessment can be actualized in standardized testing, which can be
administered uniformly at scale, with minimal interruption to already
cramped classroom time, and responded to off line in future iterations
of a course, as planning time and budget permit. But formative
assessment is far more personal, deeper, and operational in real-time;
it must be conducted on a per-classroom basis, typically during class
time, and appropriate course corrections must be available at the
instructor's fingertips. The scale that leads to summative
assessment's efficiency is also its greatest weakness; differences
between individual classes and cohorts get washed out, and adaptation
is slow and can only converge toward a global mean. Formative
assessment, though more labor intensive, is also far more nimble.

Time is at a premium in the workshop environment. Taking time out to
administer lengthy summative exams or in-depth formative
investigations of student performance isn't feasible; we want the
adaptivity aspired to by formative assessment, in exercises that take
a few minutes.

Multiple Choice Questions provide an excellent assessment device for
balancing time investment with depth of scrutiny; [the following
exercise](http://mozillascience.github.io/instructorTraining/designAndAdaptation/assessment_01.html)
goes through their construction and use.

### Adaptation

So - you've just administered a quick formative multiple choice
question, and the majority of your students are quite convinced that
37+25 = 512; what now? Formative assessment has zeroed in on a
misconception; armed with that knowledge, what are some strategies for
correcting the problem?

This is one place a densely connected concept map comes in
handy. Presumably the first time you taught the misbegotten concept,
it was introduced as a node on a concept map connected to some
pre-existing scaffolding the students were comfortable with. Perhaps
the connection originally explored was more obvious to some students
than others; coming at the concept again from a different connection
will reinforce the understanding of those that already get it, and
give those struggling another run at it. If addition fell flat as a
powered-up version of counting, re-examine number representation and
the meaning of places and digits, for example.

Repeating nearly identical examples that follow the same lines of
reasoning, on the other hand, not only adds little to the
conversation, but runs the risk of being counterproductive, by
reasserting the confusion that lead to misconception in the first
place, thus potentially cementing it even further. The trouble being,
that even the most creative instructor eventually runs out of ways to
explain the same idea. How can we create a learning environment that's
even more adaptive than we are? We'll explore this in the next lesson,
on *Peer Instruction*.

> ## FIXME {.challenge}
>
> FIXME
