Outline of the Course

1. Overview and key concepts
2. Reverse instructional design (ex: multiple-choice questions).
3. Learner-centered design (ex: task characterization).
4. Concept mapping (ex: create concept map).
5. Active learning (ex: live lesson).
6. Motivation and diversity (ex: personal history).
7. Organizing and running a workshop (ex: set up a workshop).
8. Wrapping up and next steps.

**Attending 10:00 UTC / 21:00 Melbourne / 11:00 London / 06:00 Boston**

*   Greg Wilson (Software Carpentry Foundation) @gvwilson
*   Joanna Jedrzejewska-Szmek
*   Luciano Issoe
*   Kai Blin (I'll also have to do 18:00 every other week due to meeting conflicts)
*   Toby Hodges
*   Stefano Menegon
*   Michelle Craft (18:00 moving forward - it's 5am!)
*   Jon Badalamenti
*   Felipe Bocca
*   Catherine Olsson (normally will do 1800h UTC)
*   Moritz Neeb
*   David Ketcheson
*   Fiona Tweedie
*   Steve Crouch
*   Bérénice Batut
*   Patrick Chapman - (

**Attending 18:00 UTC / 19:00 London / 14:00 Boston / 11:00 Seattle**

*   Greg Wilson (Software Carpentry Foundation) @gvwilson
*   Bill McClung
*   Melissa Guzman
*   Ross Barnowski
*   Joaquín Morís
*   Andreas Mueller
*   Jingchao Zhang
*   Natasha Pavlovikj
*   Juan Ugalde
*   Holly Murray
*   Jennifer Nafziger
*   Edwin van der Helm
*   Jin Choi
*   Nina Overgaard Therkildsen
*   Rochelle Terman
*   Sean Barberie
*   Patricia Vera
*   Nada Ghanem
*   Tina O'Grady
*   Sonia Suarez (I may move to 10 UTC, I have conflict with my school schedule)
*   Elita Baldridge
*   Sigrid Klerke
*   Ahmed Moustafa
*   Jane Charlesworth
*   Lukas Weber
*   Jackie Milhans
*   Skipper Seabold
*   Christina Koch
*   Karin Lagesen (instructor)
*   Jillian Dunic
*   Eric J. Ma (MIT) @ericmjl
*   Tobin Magle @tobinmagle
*   Evan Johnson
*   Keith Ma
*   Steve Van Tuyl

Notes

*   Scope of the course

*   Basic terms
    *   educational psychology - the study of how people learn, spanning everything from neuroscience to sociology. In this class, we will take a cognitivist approach - how brains learn. Social context matters but is not our focus. SWC students usually physically & socially secure enough that they don't have significant impediments to learning (well fed, not in physical danger, good enough at managing a learning disability to manage, etc.)
    *   instructional design - engineering of lesson design, what works in the classroom. Most popular way to teach reading is through 'phonics' - sounds to words. Another approach is 'whole language': idea is that instead of teaching letters, you teach recognition of entire words - as a shape. They can start reading stories immediately. Dr Seuss' writing motivated by repeated words, enjoy story, then go back to learn about letters in the words. Which is better?  What works most of the time for most people (there will always be outliers). However, is this the right question? The teaching approach is less important than the teacher's enthusiasm! (children model teacher's behavior). 3 factors:
        *   Need for bottom up learning
        *   Need for immediate, tangible rewards
        *   Teachers enthusiasm: students model the teacher
    *   pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) - when teaching 3 things in play:
        *   Domain (content or subject) knowledge (e.g. roman history, estonian grammar).
        *   Other side, general knowledge of education; responding to enthusiasm, tangible rewards.
        *   In between (and undocumented!) - is PCK: how do I teach this particular subject? e.g. what examples do I use with explaining call stacks? A few books bringing together PCK: maths (eg Teaching Statistics, A Bag of Tricks )and physics (eg Gedanken Physics) education. How do you correct misunderstandings? Programming not yet one of them! Still working out how to do this - we're 25-30 years behind other fields!
	        *   http://csteachingtips.org/  - recently funded NSF project
        *   Problem: PCK elements are to a large extent not written down for CS.
*   We are not only teaching programming, we are teaching them how to think differently.
*   Cognitive development study of development of expertise in nurses by Patricia Benner, looking at changes in how people think. 5 stages of progression from novice to expert (Patricia Benner)  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dreyfus_model_of_skill_acquisition (we're simplifying to novice, competent, expert)
    *   novice - lack of a working mental model of the key ideas and how they relate - questions aren't even wrong, they just don't make sense. Form analogies with what is already known but these may not be appropriate/ useful. Guesses will be pretty wild as there is nothing to base them on (e.g. how many chairs do you need to start a stock exchange?). Do not overload novices with too much information as you will reinforce incorrect mental models.
    *   competent - people who can do normal tasks with normal effort under normal circumstances (3 Ns)
    *   expert <-tbd next week.
*   Two types of teaching materials:
    *   Tutorial - to build mental model, provide the novice learner with "landmarks" to help them build a working mental model
    *   Reference guide (or manual): Fill in details of the mental model. Will confuse the person who doesn't have a mental model
*   Goal of teaching to novices: not giving information, but instead create working mental model of a subject. Too much information at the beginning can hamper development of the model or reinforce faulty pre-existing model.
    *   eg Just need to build a solid foundation. Unix shell. 15 commands in 3 hours; actually teaching file structure, history, wildcards, pipes & filters to teach how to glue existing tools together. Without model of how to apply knowledge, commands make no sense.
    *   if you don't have a good mental model of a file system and how it works, installing software can prove more difficult than actually using it. Need to teach them the smallest number of concepts, and relationships between them, to get them going. Two types of document: tutorial (goal is to build mental model), and reference guide (useful for those who actually have a mental model incorporated). Each has a different aim, very difficult to do both at the same time!
    *   When writing lessons etc, need to choose whether the goal is to create a mental model or to write a reference/manual.
*   Often a need for clearing up misconceptions.
*   Three levels of misconception: Need to identify student misconceptions
    *   Factual (content) errors - e.g. if you believe that Vancouver is capital of British Columbia (it's Victoria). These are easily fixed, especially once people have a mental model. Can correct by giving the student new evidence.
    *   Broken models - e.g. take a ball, throw it into the air. At top of its arc, it stops moving. What's the force/acceleration on the ball? Need to be led through a process so that they see what's not working, the contradiction. "That can't be right because..." need to establish the *why*. Can correct by working through reasoning with the student.
    *   Fundamental beliefs - e.g. if someone tells you world is 6000 years old, not said for scientific reasons, probably said for religious reasons. Totem: Part of being in a larger social group.  Can't really fix these in classes. Can encounter misconceptions where teaching is not an effective approach to resolve them. Beliefs not based on evidence won't be fixed by more evidence. Unlikely to be a major problem teaching SWC! (unless you're discussing which text editor is the best... ;))
    *   Focus for SWC learning: repairing broken models.
*   Assessment - how do we tell if learning is taking place? That teaching has worked? Have to think about both together - they are collaborative. Won't work if one is not working.
    *   Summative
        *   Done at end of teaching to tell whether the learning took place. Certification of learning, e.g. driver's licence - are you safe to drive?
    *   Formative
        *   Are we succeeding right now? Is the pace correct? Can we move on?
        *   Done as learning is taking place to see if the learning is happening to form/reshape the teaching. It's a pair evaluation (whether both teacher and student are doing well or not). Can see this when someone is taught how to play the piano, and common in athletics, where they receive feedback as they train. It should assist learning, and builds up to summative assessment. If you get a question in an exam on material you've never been prepared for - often a sign of badly designed teaching. A good tool for formative assessment: multiple choice tests Formative assessment is for the teacher as much as the students. A well-designed MCQ will diagnose where the problem with the learning lies. Each wrong answer is a plausible distractor (look like they might be right) with diagnostic power. Tells teacher which misconception needs to be cleared up. But some are not well thought through by teachers.
        *   Practice for the summative assessment
        *   want nearly instantaneous results
        *   can be used before teaching starts. Here we want to diagnose the students' background.
        *   Instructors can use this information to understand the learner's mental model (modeling the model) to figure out how to fix it
*   Example: designing multiple choice questions (MCQs).  plausible distractors with diagnostic power are needed. Tell you what the misconceptions are
    ~~~
    Q: what is 27 + 15 ?
    a) 42
    b) 32
    c) 312
    d) 33
    ~~~
    *   If a child is learning multi-digit addition, and she says:
    *   b) '32', what is wrong with her mental model of addition? She's throwing the carry away.
    *   c) '312' - what is wrong with her mental model this time? She know's she can't throw the carried '1' away, but adds it to a new middle column instead.
    *   d) '33' - know's she has to carry the '1', but adds it to the wrong column.
    *   Each incorrect answer above is a plausible distractor with diagnostic power. Questions like this are worth their weight in gold: you can use them every 5-10 minutes in teaching, to see if the mental model for learners is correct, and even in which ways they are not understanding something.
    *   Wrong answers must be plausible, wrong in a meaningful way (can diagnose a misconception). Note: we could be diagnosing the wrong misconception, but better than no data.
    *   Requires you to think about what the likely problems are going to be when designing a lesson (like a smoke alarm)
*   Always try to close a lesson with some reflection
*   If everybody correct: you can move on. If most get the wrong answer, know which misconception to clear up, if everbody goes whereever, have to start over again.
*   The frequency of the wrong option will determine whether to review one specific misconception or the whole topic.
*   Gold standard is 1-to-1 teaching. But here, we are looking for scalable teaching methods that give us feedback.Bad teaching: teachers that just go on and on without figuring out whether students are getting what you are trying to teach.
*   Feedback loops make teaching more effective (multiple methods for achieving this, i.e. Post-Its, clickers, etc.)
    *   side benefit of feedback loops: students will trust that their instructor is really trying to help them learn
*   Can use formative assessment before teaching to "triage" the needs of the class --- Can figure out where in the material a lesson can start.
*   Homework - 3 different piazza posts by Monday
    *   Create one MCQ (multiple choice question)  and explain diagnostic power of distractors - what is each distractor trying to identify as a misconception? (should be something we are likely to teach on Data or Software carpentry, or related to the kinds of materials that is taught in Data Carpentry or Software Carpentry (Foundation))
    *   Identify a misconception and explain how to get learners to confront it - aim of clearing up mental model - what example/line of reasoning do you use?
    *   describe one other formative (diagnostic) assessment technique you've seen used, which scales, and explain why it works
    *    Most important: Also provide feedback to at least two other people's answers
*   Questions
    *   how to balance the student's expections? Some want manuals, but they really need tutorials first, but they think that is too basic, and doesn't help them
        *   State your (teacher's) expectation and invite suggestions
        *   Christina: sometimes I acknowledge that material may seem basic, but that there will be at least something to learn (asking for buy-in)
    *   What do you do in a course where there are novices and non-novices?
        *   try to make sure they're not in the same class
        *   when they are, enlist non-novices as helpers (pair teaching)
    *   where can I find an explanation of "totem" as you used it? (See: social identity theory, "the righteous mind" is a good book about this)
    *   How many students need to "get it" before we can reasonably move on?
        *   it depends :P
    *   how often should we ask for students feedback during a lecture ?
        *   typically every 5-10 minutes
    *   can the multiple choice question really cover an entire block of teaching?
        *   see above: one "block of teaching" should be about 5-10 minutes (small enough to be addressed by a single question), a full class may be 5-6 blocks
    *   don't people need time to reflect on the material before than can answer a question?
*   The "sticky notes" approach
    *   One colour each for "I am doing great", and one for "I am not doing so great"
    *   Helps instructor get a high-level view of how the class is doing.
