**10:00 UK time (NOTE: an hour earlier than usual)**

* Greg Wilson (Software Carpentry Foundation)
* Sarah Morgan (EMBL-EBI)
* Joanna Jedrzejewska-Szmek
* Natasha Pavlovikj
* Juan Ugalde
* Patrick Chapman
* Kai Blin
* Fiona Tweedie
* Moritz Neeb
* jane charlesworth
* Stefano Menegon
* Steve Crouch
* Sigrid Klerke
* Toby Hodges

**19:00 UK time**

* Greg Wilson (Software Carpentry Foundation)
* Jingchao Zhang
* Nina Overgaard Therkildsen
* Bill McClung
* Nada Ghanem
* Tomomi Sunayama: 
* Sarah Morgan (EMBL-EBI)
* Ross Barnowski
* David Ketcheson
* Lukas Weber
* Rochelle Terman
* Peter van Heusden
* Phil Rosenfield
* Keith Ma
* Christina Koch (University of Wisconsin, Madison)
* Elita Baldridge
* Jennifer Nafziger
* Eric Ma
* Sean Barberie
* Steve Van Tuyl (could have at old meeting time but can't in an hour)
* Patricia Vera
* Joaquín Morís
* Melissa Guzman
* Bérénice Batut
* Michelle Craft
* Skipper Seabold
* Jackie Milhans
* Catherine Olsson
* Ahmed Moustafa
* Jon Badalamenti
* Jillian Dunic
* Tobin Magle
* Sonia Suarez
* Karin Lagesen
* Andreas Mueller
* Tina O'Grady
* Edwin van der Helm
* Aleksandra Pawlik (SSI,  ethepad only) 
* Luciano Issoe

**Review**

* Faded examples: 
  * https://piazza.com/class/ievn0vmv5hm3na?cid=232
  * https://piazza.com/class/ievn0vmv5hm3na?cid=214
  * What makes a good faded example?
    * no gaps -> few gaps -> many gaps
    * variation in task
    * instructions for each example task
    * after initial teaching, mostly examples for students to work through on their own // some faded examples interleaved examples + teaching
* Accessibility
  * A simple well-written text: https://piazza.com/class/ievn0vmv5hm3na?cid=223 - nothing wrong with text explanations until they stop working. Cannot be only solution.
  * Checking accessibility of websites for visually impaired users: http://wave.webaim.org/report#/software-carpentry.org
  * Kerb cuts: https://piazza.com/class/ievn0vmv5hm3na?cid=210 (mobility impairment access ramps for sidewalks) - the things that help those with disabilities also help everyone
  * Rhyming: https://piazza.com/class/ievn0vmv5hm3na?cid=164
  * The long tail: https://piazza.com/class/ievn0vmv5hm3na?cid=207 (wide variety of challenges for different people, difficult to cover every situation) 
* Concept maps for tabular data: https://piazza.com/class/ievn0vmv5hm3na?cid=158
  * More direction => more feedback
* what we learned:
  * many different views on problems, people thought about things in different ways. all have something interested and useful in them. 
  * increased the number of comments on each post. 

**Learning styles - Lecture by Sarah Morgan**

* The "learning styles" referred to in this lesson are *not* the "auditory", "kinesthetic", etc. that some might be familiar with
  * See http://bigthink.com/neurobonkers/why-the-widespread-belief-in-learning-styles-is-not-just-wrong-its-also-dangerous for debunking of that
* based instead on Kolb experiential learning cycle
  * How do people learn?
  * How can we tell that people are learning?
* Have you ever reflected on the approach / process you take to learning?  --> for example: what activities you enjoy? 
  * eg learning style questionnaires
  * different people have different preferred styles
* What about a room full of trainees - would you expect them to take a similar approach or different approaches?
* Do you expect students from a similar background to have similar learning styles?
  * Individuals all have their own ways of learning - may have been exposed to the same teaching style but this doesn't change underlying learning style.  However, people can change + grow in their learning styles.  
* Note: learning styles are not necessarily set in stone, people can change deliberately, and with time.
* Kolb experiential learning cycle (David A Kolb, 1984)
  * Four elements: Concrete experience / reflective observation /abstract conceptualisation / active experimentation.
  * Kolb - you start with concrete experience and work round thecycle
  * But others state you may start at different points on the cycle according to your preference.
  * Kolb Learning Cycle image: http://cdn-5.simplypsychology.org/learning-kolb.jpg
  * People who like to start with concrete example may start at stage 1; more conceptual thinkers may start at 3.
* Honey and Mumford (1986) built upon this, describing 4 learning styles:
  * Activist / Theorist / Pragmatist / Reflector
  * https://docs.google.com/document/d/1xEMpzZdDTEusF6zkDvxkBV7FCcGw_Nmf0o/edit
* Mapping across Kolb to Honey and Mumford:
    * Concrete experience = Activists: Jump in, have a go, like to be fully immersed in an experience/ activity; learn by doing
    * Reflective observation = Reflectors: Like more space to think & observe; watch activists
    * Abstract conceptualisation = Theorist: Like very structured activities, want to analyse the information
    * Active experimentation = Pragmatist: Ok to jump in but need to see practical application - link to world around them; need to see how concepts fit into the world

**Some thoughts from chat:**

* Question: Can a theorist learn something practical: shell?
  * Theorist answer: I'm a strong theorist, and I want to learn things like the frameworks: the command goes here, the options are here; commands are looked up in the path like this; etc. I'd rather learn the underlying structure, before spending too much time with examples. After just a few examples, I want to move to the theory swiftly. If I start with a huge pile of doing, before getting any theory, I don't get insight; I get frustrated ;)
* Activist perspective: I have trouble knowing what I don't know about a process until I've tried doing it.  Some people really do extract the theory best *by doing* rather than by having the theory told to them
* Q: How can the teacher adapts teaching style based on learners styles? (see line 141/147)
* Note: need to distinguish between "theory" (the content of the lesson) and the Theorist approach to learning (want to know principles/underlying theory of something before using/doing it)

* Informal poll to everybody: What do you think is your approach?
  * Activist: Eric (I start my research this way), Christina, Andy, Felipe, Peter, Michelle
  * Reflector: Tobin, Elita (for physical things), Keith, Lukas, Nada
  * Theorist: Greg (when younger), Andy, Edwin, Jonx, Tina, Jingchao, Catherine, David, Bill, Nina, Jen (pretty close with pragmatist)
  * Pragmatist: Greg (in middle age), Bérénice, Elita (for idea things) Luciano, Melissa, Sean Barberie, David, Patricia

* If people have been taught in the same way, they may share styles to a larger extent. 
  * Scientists often come out as Reflector theorists.
* Question is: are scientists Reflector Theorists because they are scientists, or the other way around?
* These learning styles can be used by learners to find the "best" method to enable their learning.
  * https://docs.google.com/document/d/1xEMpzZdDTEudKeuxNoGnsF6zkDvxkBV7FCcGw_Nmf0o/edit
* Why worry about learning styles?
  * mixture of learning styles in a group, so consider using a mix of methods where possible to allow for these styles
  * trainers will often deliver training in their preferred learning style (which may not work for everyone in the room!)
* Styles and activities:
  * Activists - enjoy jumping in and trying new things, new experiences
  * Reflectors - like some space to think and reflect on what they have learnt
  * Theorists - learn from structured, logical learning activities
  * Pragmatists - enjoy practical, problem solving activities.
* How do we ensure that people learn the most?
  * Activists: brainstorming, 
  * Reflectors: observing, getting feedback, smaller discussions, 
  * Theorists: reading, figuring out models, 
  * Pragmatists enjoy case studies etc. 
* Example: how can you have a practical session that works for all learning styles?
  * Activists: jump straight in, likely not to read all the details
  * Theorists: need explanations in the beginning and between each step
  * Reflectors: give them time to work through it, slow things down to allow them time to thing
  * Pragmatists: have an example that fit into their context. 
* Other notes:
  * Versions of questionnaire exist - don't have only 1 learning style, may have 1 or 2 dominant styles. Some ppl like all the styles. 
  * In terms of popular styles, scientists often come out as reflective theorists. Is this just because of the way they're taught?
  * Preferences can change over time (due to a variety of factors, including our motivations)
  * Can be good to mix learning styles up  - there will usuall be a mix in the group anyway; methods can be combined/ adapted so that they work for diff learnign styles.
  * As a trainer, you will probably skew to your preferred learning style, so need to be aware of that.
  * Learning activities can be matched to different learning styles (see table linked at l. 70). Link practical and theory - e.g. give a handout with information & exercises which diff learners can approach in their own way (read everything first/ go straight into the exercise etc.)

**Assessing your own learning style**

* You can assess your own learning style  and reflect on what your result is. There are a number of Honey and Mumford versions available; an online abridged version
* https://www.on-course.eu/toolkit/ - you will need to register to use this.
* Or for a "paper" version: https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B1WHkPW8ujYHV18xcGEzNXd0cVE/view?usp=sharing

**From learning styles to outcomes**

* https://docs.google.com/document/d/1WmdWTV0wa3zN0dzDuFHa4P0g8PUMZos-bejA-bubGdE/edit
* Where to start when designing training - what do you want your students to achieve at the end of your session /course.
* How to you put learning styles together to make a course - what should a person know/ be able to do by the end of the session? Articulate learning outcome or objective.
  * "At the end of this course you should be able to..." 
  * For trainer - is an aid to writing the training, can work backwards - how to get student to designed end point; can also be used for assessment - have they learned what they were meant to?
* Learning outcomes / objectives (LO's) - "At the end of this course you should be able to..."
* Important for both trainer and learner
  * Trainer  -an aid to develop the training - work backwards from what they should know / be able to do to what they need to learn to get there.
  * Trainer - as an assessment of session / course success
  * Learner - manage expectations for the course, "is this course right for me?"
  * Learner - to self-assess their learning.
* Objective or outcome?
  * Objective -intended results
  * Outcome -achieved results
  * Note: these two are _not_ the same
  * "We aim for objectives, we get outcomes"
* Whether the Learning outcome or objective, should be SMART:
  * Specific - what should people know/ be able to do?
  * Measurable - should be able to be assessed by trainer, student / both
  * Achievable *in context* within constraints of medium, time available
  * Realistic - is this a realistic outcome for this group of students?
  * Time bound - in what timeframe?
* Eg  "...be able to describe the impact of learning styles on teaching practice."
* *"A measurable verb in context"*
* What verbs to use?
  * need to consider depth of learning (what they are able to do with the knowledge), here you can apply Blooms taxonomy (1956)
    * Knowledge (fact recall), 
    * understanding (what does the fact mean?), 
    * application (how can the fact be used?), combining with previous knowledge
    * analysis (looking at them in more detail), 
    * synthesis (use the fact), 
    * evaluation, judgment call, (maybe) producing new information
  * Use appropriate verbs for the depth of learning you want students to achieve.
  * while these verbs vaguely correspond to increasingly high levels of education, bear in mind that students may not have knowledge base to access higher levels of learning when they are tackling a new area. Even if somebody are at post-grad level generally, they might not be at that level for this subject. 
* Beware of using un-measurable verbs...
  * Appreciate - how can you assess someone’s appreciation?
  * Understand - out of a particular context is not measurable.
  * Objectives and outcomes can be used as basis of assessment - if you can't assess it, maybe you need to rethink objective.
  * Remember that objectives/outcomes can be used as the basis of assessments - if they are un-assessable they may need re-writing.
* How many Learning Objective/Outcomess?
  * avoid providing too many Llearning Objectives/Outcomesper session or course
    * Q: how long is a "session"? An hour? perhaps one lecture session, one tutorial session?
  * 4-6 at most at course level, e.g. 2-3 day course@
  * can be less at session level
* Idea by Raymond Chandler: write a text, take notes from that, throw the text away and rewrite it a few days later.
* Questions
  * Q: share Learning Outcomes/Objectives with students? A: definitely
  * Q: where can I find before-and-after Learning Outcomes/Objectives (badly written and their well-written equivalents)? A: SM will post
  * Q: is there a way to gauge learning styles in a group quickly? A: Can do a questionnaire at the start of a course or just ask people to discuss/ reflect
  * Q: how can Learning Outcomes/Objectives be assessed afterwards? A: Learning Outcomes/Objectives turn into summative assessment questions
  * Q: what happens if Learning Outcomes/Objectives don't go as planned (fail to implement/fulfil them)? A: go back and review, scale based on experience
  * Q: can Learning Outcomes/Objectives change as the course progresses? A: shouldn't in theory, but in real life... *shrug*
  * Q: how easy is it to make Learning Outcomes/Objectives specific without filling them with qualifiers (e.g., "Be able to perform stat analysis on well-formatted data with no null values")? A: depends on scale
  * Q: interleaving vs. front-loading the teaching?
  * Q: can "learning styles" be applied to writing, in addition to learning? anecdotally, I feel that people write papers in those main categories as well (some just start writing, others do detailed outlines, etc.)
  * Q: as we go more advanced in bloom's taxonomy, does assessment become less and less "defined"/"measureable" (MCQ-style) and more and more "interpretable"/"interactive" (free-response/discussion/essay)?

**Homework**

1. Complete the Teaching Perspective Inventory, post results, and discuss both your results and what you think of this approach: http://www.teachingperspectives.com/tpi/
    * Do you agree with what it says about you?
    * Do you think it is valuable/credible?
2. Pick one topic (typically 10-15 minutes of teaching) from the standard Software Carpentry or Data Carpentry lessons, write SMART learning objectives for it (reverse engineering), post, and discuss.
    * We'll group people as we did this week with concept maps.
    * Discuss whether the lesson accomplishes what it set out to achieve. Does it contain too much? Is the content on point with the learning objectives?
