**11:00 UK time**

* Tomomi Sunayama
* Felipe Bocca
* Fiona Tweedie
* Jon Badalamenti
* Stefano Menegon 
* Moritz Neeb
* Steve Crouch
* Bérénice Batut
* Jane Charlesworth 
* Joanna Jedrzejewska-Szmek
* Joaquin Morís
* Tina O'Grady
* Sigrid Klerke
* Kai Blin

**19:00 UK time**

* Jennifer Nafziger
* Nina Overgaard Therkildsen
* Christina Koch
* Natasha Pavlovikj
* David Ketcheson
* Elita Baldridge
* Jingchao Zhang
* Toby Hodges
* Steve Van Tuyl
* Patricia Vera Wolf
* Patrick Chapman
* Eric Ma
* Sarah Morgan
* Lukas Weber
* Keith Ma
* Holly Murray
* Tobin Magle
* Bill McClung
* Sean Barberie
* Jackie Milhans
* Rochelle Terman
* Skipper Seabold
* Luciano Issoe
* Michelle Craft
* Catherine Olsson
* Andreas Mueller
* Melissa Guzman
* Ahmed Moustafa
* Sonia Suarez
* Juan Ugalde
* Jin Choi
* Nada Ghanem
* Guilherme Castelao
* Edwin van der Helm

Review of last week's assignments - Sarah

* Example of teaching experience: Students didn't need to know "which button to click", but "get a deeper understanding of the concepts".
* two approaches - > writing objectives based on lesson content versus writing objectives based on what you think is most important
* start with initial set of outcomes and then refine through experience and thought
* Be careful with "understand" (or appreciate!) - add a little more about context, or how to measure understanding
  * --> useful resource from last week: "table" of verbs
* a good way to set the objectives is to ask ourselves how would we measure them. How do we know whether the students achieved the learning goals.
* e.g. Understand git command (can be interpreted in several ways):

    Choose the correct arguments
    Explain what happens on your computer
    Describe the purpose

Live coding demonstration - Fiona/Christina

* Teaching some python basics across an example of nltk
* Sometime you taught how to do something in python, and only then you explained why that would be useful, doing it the other way might engage more significative learning (need -> solution)
* It walked clearly through the function and loop concepts. I actually disagree that it wasn't obvious what the goals were - I assume for the audience described it would be relevant and interesting. I was worried about the typo, but it worked, so it must have been defined somewhere. I actually like when typos happen as before I saw some live coding I assumed I was the only person making them constantly.
* Typos/mistakes are actually really useful because troubleshooting is a really important part of coding
* It was impressive how you kept to the plan without mentioning all the little weird things that also happens (like division in python 2...)
* From coding in an example that can be "closer to domain area" to help students understand was a good thing. Sometimes, people strugle with some coding for "I don't know how to use this in my domain". 
* Nice performance, but didn't know the goals in the beginning, thought it was about nltk - in fact was more about basics of python.
* Technical considerations are really important - make sure before you start that any technology/software that you want to use in teaching/demonstration is working and reliable
* Also think about font readability & size - makes it as easy as possible for people to follow along.
* Asking people to follow and type along can be good, but can also be a distraction from what you are actually explaining & demonstrating. Consider providing a transcript so that people don't feel under pressure to keep up, or ask them to listen only, then give them time to try things out for themselves.

* Exercises for this week (will be posted on Piazza/emailed later today)
  * Read http://software-carpentry.org/workshops/operations.html

**Hints:**

* Overbook workshops, especially if they are free.
* Making people pay for the workshop reduces the numbers of no-shows, a deposit that is refunded only if they show up also works.=
* Find a room where helpers can move around and actually help people. Lecture theatres are not very convenient for this
* Create focus for workshop - eg specific group working together on something (women-only, medics etc)
* If you want social media coverage, assign that job to one of your helpers

http://software-carpentry.org/workshops/assess/pre-learner.html

* Suggest a change to this survey to help you get better information to prepare yourself for class (think back to our discussions of formative assessment and prior knowledge)

**Live coding:**

* Demonstrate for 2-3 minutes (plenty long enough for other people to give feedback).
* Have couple of times each (the first one is always bumpy).
* When giving feedback, think separately about content (what you said) and presentation (how you said it).  Some people can have a really well-structured talk and flub the delivery; others can do very polished delivery, but not actually say much.
* When writing about your experience,concentrate on what's different between teaching this way and (a) teaching with slides and (b) teaching in front of a class. Live coding online is doubly strange, since you can't see the audience and are trying to do two things at once (code and talk); try to address the two separately in your reflection.
* Suggestion: Screenshare via google hangout
